rm: security: add initial doc for uefi secure boot (#387)
foundriesio/docs: source/reference-manual/security/secure-boot-uefi.rst

2. Create the directory used to store the keys and certificates

.. prompt:: bash host:~$

    mkdir custom_uefi_keys_and_certs

3. Run the ``gen_uefi_certs.sh`` script

.. prompt:: bash host:~$

    cd custom_uefi_keys_and_certs
    ../lmp-tools/security/uefi/gen_uefi_certs.sh

The generated certificates will have to be enrolled into your target UEFI implementation.
The DB private key will have to be made available to LmP during build time, for signing the required bootloader and kernel boot images.
Also make sure to store the keys and certificates generated securely.

How to enable UEFI Secure Boot usage in LmP
-------------------------------------------

The signing process in LmP is controlled by the following Yocto variables:

* ``UEFI_SIGN_KEYDIR``
    * Path for the directory containing the DB private key (``DB.key``) and required certificates (``PK.cer``, ``KEK.cer``, ``DB.cer`` and ``DBX.cer``) files
* ``UEFI_SIGN_ENABLE``
    * If set to ``1`` the systemd-boot bootloader and linux kernel binaries will be signed by with the DB key (``DB.key`` at ``UEFI_SIGN_KEYDIR``)

How to backup factory UEFI Secure Boot Certificates
---------------------------------------------------

> It is advisable to backup the UEFI Secure Boot factory values, so they may be restored in case of errors.

Author: This can indeed be confusing, here factory means the original UEFI Secure Boot variable values that were set by the OEM.

> It is advisable to backup the UEFI Secure Boot factory values, so they may be restored in case of errors.

Author: Changed from 'factory' to 'current'.

The default UEFI-based bootloader used by LmP is `systemd-boot`_.

Keys and Roles
--------------

**Platform Key (PK):**

Master key certificate.
Only one PK may exist on the system as a RSA-2048 X509 certificate.
The PK private key can sign UEFI environment variable changes or KEK, DB and DBX changes that can be validated by the PK certificate.
The PK cannot be used for signing binaries that are verified at boot time.

**Key Exchange Keys (KEKs):**

Key normally used by system and OS vendors.
One or more KEKs are typically available as RSA-2048 X509 certificates.
The KEK private key can sign changes to DB and DBX.
KEK can also be used to sign bootable content, however that is not usually recommended as replacing KEK is not trivial due PK involvement.

**Allow list Database (DB):**

Can contain SHA-256 hashes or RSA-2048 X509 certificates.
Binaries without known hashes can be validated by a certificate.
In LmP the DB private key is the main key used for signing both the bootloader and the kernel binaries.

**Deny list Database (DBX):**

Can contain SHA-256 hashes or RSA-2048 X508 certificates.
The DBX has veto power during boot time and gets parsed first during the boot chain.

> Any binary hash matching a DBX hash or that has a signature verified by a DBX certificate will be prevented from executing at boot time.

Author: @kprosise bulleted list ended up looking a bit weird, so changed to a term list associated with a definition, see if that looks better now.

> Any binary hash matching a DBX hash or that has a signature verified by a DBX certificate will be prevented from executing at boot time.

Reviewer: yep!

Vendor Operating Modes for UEFI Secure Boot
-------------------------------------------

> Different modes are available based on the UEFI Secure Boot implementation done by the vendor. Some of the most commonly found modes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Different modes are available based on the UEFI Secure Boot implementation done by the vendor.
The most commonly found modes are:
```

**Disabled Mode:**

Secure boot validation is disabled, and any EFI binary can be executed during boot.
Disabled mode is the default in Legacy or Compatibility Support Module modes.

**Setup Mode:**

Option available when the system does not have a PK installed.
Setup mode allows for PK, KEK, DB and DBX values to be manipulated by the user for claiming ownership of the Secure Boot implementation.

Once PK is added by the user, most UEFI implementations move the active mode from Setup to User/Custom at the next boot automatically (this is the reason why it should be the last certificate to be added by the user).

How to create UEFI Secure Boot Keys
-----------------------------------

The suggested way to create a custom set of UEFI Secure Boot keys and certificates is via the `lmp-tools gen_uefi_certs.sh <https://github.com/foundriesio/lmp-tools/blob/master/security/uefi/gen_uefi_certs.sh>`_ script.

1. Clone the ``lmp-tools`` repository from GitHub

.. prompt:: bash host:~$

    git clone https://github.com/foundriesio/lmp-tools.git

> 2. Create the directory used to store the keys and certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create the directory for storing the keys and certificates
```

How to backup current UEFI Secure Boot Certificates
---------------------------------------------------

It is advisable to backup the UEFI Secure Boot current values (created and included by the UEFI firmware and hardware platform vendors), so they may be restored in case of errors.

.. note::

    Some vendors might require hashes to be available in the user defined DB hash list in order for certain hardware resources to be available at boot time (e.g. network devices, storage controllers, etc). Backing up the current values is useful in case they need to be restored or later added in your custom DB hash list. Please check with your hardware platform vendor for more information.

1. Boot LmP with UEFI Secure Boot disabled
2. Dump the UEFI Secure Boot variables (EFI Signature List format)

.. prompt:: bash $

    efi-readvar -v PK -o PK.old.esl
    efi-readvar -v KEK -o KEK.old.esl
    efi-readvar -v db -o DB.old.esl
    efi-readvar -v dbx -o DBX.old.esl

The ``sig-list-to-certs`` utility (from efitools) can be used to break from ESL into hashes and certificates.

> How to enroll custom UEFI Secure Boot Certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enrolling Custom UEFI Secure Boot Certificates
```

--------------------------------------------------

> It is possible to enroll custom UEFI Secure Boot Certificates by using your firmware's built-in setup utility, ``KeyTool`` (from efitools) or by creating a custom ``LockDown`` efi program with the certificates embedded into it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to enroll custom UEFI Secure Boot Certificates using your firmware's built-in setup utility, ``KeyTool`` (from efitools), or by creating a custom ``LockDown`` efi program with the certificates embedded into it.
```

By default LmP installs the required certificates (via ``UEFI_SIGN_KEYDIR``) into the ESP image partition (under ``ESP/uefi_certs``).

> This can be easily used when enrolling via the firmware's built-in setup utility. For automating the enroll process using ``LockDown`` would be the recommended path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be used when enrolling via the firmware's built-in setup utility.
When automating the enrollment process, using ``LockDown`` is the recommended path.
```

Example with **QEMU OVMF**:

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-device-manager.png
   :alt: UEFI Setup Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-device-manager-screen.png
   :alt: UEFI Device Manager Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-enabling-custom-mode.png
   :alt: UEFI Secure Boot Configuration Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-custom-mode-enabled.png
   :alt: UEFI Secure Boot Custom Mode Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-db-options.png
   :alt: UEFI Secure Boot Key List Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-file-explorer.png
   :alt: UEFI Secure Boot File Explorer Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-db-enroll.png
   :alt: UEFI Secure Boot DB.cer Enroll Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-kek-enroll.png
   :alt: UEFI Secure Boot KEK.cer Enroll Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-pk-enroll.png
   :alt: UEFI Secure Boot PK.cer Enroll Screen

.. figure:: secure-boot-uefi/uefi-secure-boot-final.png
   :alt: UEFI Secure Boot Configuration Final Screen

> How to verify the UEFI Secure Boot state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verifying the UEFI Secure Boot State
```

----------------------------------------

> The best way to check if UEFI Secure Boot is indeed enabled and used at runtime is by executing the ``bootctl`` tool:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check if UEFI Secure Boot is enabled and used at runtime, execute the ``bootctl`` tool:
```
